---
layout: blog_post
title: 'C++11: Auto'
published: true
date: '2012-02-26 17:45:43'
redirect_from:
- content/c11-auto/
- node/4422/
- import_node/475/
tags:
- C++11
- C++
- Programming
---

We've already covered [C++11 decltype](/content/c11-decltype) and why you should [start using C++11 features today](/import_node/471). Now we will move on to one of the most widely supported C++11 features: the new `auto` keyword.; `auto` is supported currently by g++ as of 4.4, clang and msvc since 10. So you are safe using it today if you don't need to support any older compilers. The `auto` keyword is used to let the compiler determine the type of a variable. This seemingly simple concept can really help clean up your code in some situations. For example:

    std::vector<:string>::const_iterator itr = myvec.begin();

Now becomes:

    auto itr = myvec.begin();

However, this tool creates some ambiguities we aren't really used to in C++. What is the type of `auto itr` above? Is it `const_iterator` or `iterator`? Or how about this snippet?

    auto s = *itr;

Is that an `std::string` or a `const std::string &`? Or something else? It turns out that it's `std::string`. This incurs a copy penalty that we might not be expecting. It was non-obvious (to me) that we can apply some modifiers to the auto keyword type to get the desired result:

    const auto &s = *itr;

Stephan T. Lavavej in the [GoingNative conference](http://channel9.msdn.com/Events/GoingNative/GoingNative-2012/STL11-Magic-Secrets) pointed out cases where not only can `auto` introduce some performance costs if we aren't paying attention, it can also increase performance when we aren't paying attention. There are cases where we might accidentally apply a built in conversion and not realize it.

    struct A
    {
    };

    struct B
    {
      B(const A &);
    };

    A getAnA();

    B a = getAnA(); // oops we just called a conversion, was that intentional?
    auto a2 = getAnA(); // we get the exact type returned

This could potentially be very useful in the case where a complex function such as `std::bind` returns a complex templated type that we naturally assign to a more user friendly `std::function`. Avoiding the conversion to an `std::function` may save some compile and run time overhead. It could also potentially get in your way. The actual type returned by `std::bind` is unspecified. This may mean that on one platform the result of `std::bind` is callable (has an implemented `operator()`) and `auto` works like you would expect whereas on another platform it is not callable and you just unintentionally introduced a portability issue in your code. It's clear that `auto` will go a long way towards cleaning up the way our C++ looks, but we will still have to be intelligent about what type it is choosing for us.
